Verified Terrain-Following Flight Planning in LeanExe
Jamie Stephens
Morphism
https://morphism.com
js@morphism.com
September 26, 2026
Abstract
A terrain-following planner must connect its discrete route choices to continuous clearance and
motion bounds, and connect its implementation to that mathematical result. This report describes
a LeanExe planner and Lean proofs of both connections. For every accepted nonempty terrain,
the generated WebAssembly model terminates with exactly the source planner’s waypoint array
and a continuously differentiable point-mass flight that satisfies the specified spatial clearance
and component speed bounds, with bounded acceleration between waypoints and one-sided
bounds at joins. The execution theorem assumes a valid caller heap, a borrowed input array, and
sufficient allocation headroom within 64 MiB. The planner minimizes exact traversal time and
then sampled altitude excess over a finite layered graph. The proof covers integer arithmetic,
predecessor selection, parent reconstruction, polynomial motion, allocation, copying, and release.
Inputs contain at most 64 elevations, and each interior station has 45 altitude–speed states. A
rest-to-rest primitive proves feasibility for every accepted terrain. Identifying the decoded drone
binary with the verified generated model remains a separate proof obligation. A self-contained
account of LeanExe describes its language, artifact-verification method, and the scalar and
bounded-loop compiler-correctness theorem now present on the main branch.

1

Result and proof scope

For every accepted nonempty terrain, the generated WebAssembly model terminates with exactly
the source planner’s waypoint array and a continuously differentiable point-mass flight that satisfies
the specified spatial clearance and component speed bounds, with bounded acceleration between
waypoints and one-sided bounds at joins. The compiled result is conditional on the caller’s heap and
allocation budget. The source result is conditional on the input bounds. The physical interpretation
assumes exact terrain interpolation and exact execution of the prescribed point-mass motion.
The public function, LeanExe.Examples.Drone.compute, maps an array of unsigned 64-bit
elevations to an array of alternating altitude and horizontal-speed words. Source correctness
establishes feasibility and lexicographic optimality in the implemented finite graph. The continuous
proof interprets those same output words as a path over physical time. The execution proof establishes
termination and exact array contents for function 25 of Project.Drone.module, the checked model of
the generated program. Its postcondition also preserves the input terrain and bounds linear memory
by 64 MiB. These results appear in Output.compute_correct, WholeFlight.compute_safe, and
Spec.compute_correct/compute_safe.
The planner is a feedforward trajectory generator for an ideal point mass. Its state choices,
motion primitives, and admissibility tests define the optimization domain. Vehicle tracking, sensor
uncertainty, disturbances, attitude dynamics, and coupled actuator limits require additional models
1

and proofs. The available optimum concerns traversal time within the specified graph. The
continuous clearance test deliberately restricts that graph through a sufficient polynomial certificate.
This report uses the drone branch for the planner and its proofs, and the current main branch
for the account of LeanExe’s compiler-correctness work. The drone execution theorem concerns its
generated WASM model. A theorem identifying a decoded drone binary with that model remains a
separate verification step. The general compiler theorem on main covers the language admitted
by compile-arithmetic. The heap-using drone program follows the per-program execution-proof
route.

2

LeanExe: goals, capabilities, and status

2.1

Checked source and executable output

LeanExe compiles a restricted subset of Lean 4 to WebAssembly and supports proofs about the
resulting computation. The earlier language report describes its runtime types, extraction, and
per-compilation proof obligations [1]. Its two verification routes serve different purposes. General
compiler correctness proves preservation for every source declaration admitted by a specified compiler
mode. Per-artifact verification proves the behavior of an identified program by decoding its binary,
checking its model, and proving the desired result directly in WASM semantics. Lean’s kernel checks
the proof terms in both routes [2].
The compiler begins with a declaration loaded from Lean’s checked environment. Extraction
follows reachable definitions, specializes supported code, resolves supported operations, and produces
a first-order intermediate representation. Ownership analysis and ABI lowering determine heap
representations, result transfer, and releases. The backend emits a structured WASM module, its
binary encoding, and optional annotations used during proof construction. The accepted language
includes machine integers, arrays, byte buffers, structures, selected inductive types and recursion
forms, conditionals, local bindings, pure Id blocks, and supported loops. The language specification
and extractor determine admission for each source form.
The ordinary compile mode produces callable exports, including programs with supported heap
values and recursive helpers. Multiple exports can share helpers and memory. Pure WASI adapters
expose bounded input, command arguments, and output. The compile-wasi-io mode accepts
a LeanExe.ByteIO UInt32 entry and implements sequenced byte reads and writes with explicit
errors and operation timeouts. Those I/O programs use the project’s nonblocking host. The host
supplies clock and polling behavior assumed by the I/O model.
Current applications include FP32 and quantized GPT-2 inference with retained attention caches,
two-dimensional Euler solvers, numerical kernels, JSON processing, and an interactive running sum.
These examples exercise different subsets and have different proof scopes. A capability demonstrated
by an executable example and a guarantee established by a theorem each require their own evidence.

2.2

General scalar and bounded-loop compiler theorem

The main branch now contains a source-to-byte compiler-correctness theorem for compile-arith
metic. Successful admission gives a WASM binary that decodes, validates, resolves the requested
export, and terminates with the source result in the pinned interpreter for every argument list of the
required length. The theorem quantifies over every host environment and initial store and preserves
that store. Execution succeeds for all sufficiently large interpreter fuel values.
The formal predicate Project.Compiler.ArithmeticModule.Correct relates an original

2

Lean.Expr, an export name, an arity, and the emitted byte array. In schematic form, it states
decode(b) = ok(r),

validate(r) = ok(),

findExport(translate(r), e) = 0,
∀a, |a| = k =⇒ ∀H, S, ∃v, N, Apply(p, a, v) ∧
∀f ≥ N, run(f, translate(r), 0, S, rev(a), H) = Success([v], S).
Here p is the source expression, b the emitted bytes, r the decoded module, e the export name, k the
arity, H the host environment, S the store, and f the interpreter fuel. Argument reversal records
the interpreter’s stack convention. The implementation statement uses UInt64 arguments and
WASM i64 values. Here Apply(p, a, v) abbreviates LeanExe.Source.Scalar.Apply with an empty
initial local environment: it consumes the source lambda binders with arguments a and evaluates
the body to v using the scalar or bounded-loop source rules. Those rules use native word operations.
The function translate is Wasm.Binary.Translation.module, which converts the decoded binary
representation into the interpreter's Wasm.Module representation.
compileEnvironment_sound derives this property from successful arithmetic compilation alone.
compileEnvironment_correct also proves admission from supported source syntax, safe and total
declaration lookup, an available export name, and numeric format limits. extracted_correct
connects successful extraction to the production CoreWasm.moduleBytes emitter. The numeric
checks bound counts, local indices, export-name bytes, and encoded payload sizes. The resulting
module includes the standard allocator and reference-counting runtime exports, whose validation
obligations also appear in the compiler proof.
The admitted language includes wrapping UInt64 arithmetic, unsigned quotient and remainder
with Lean’s zero-divisor behavior, bitwise operations, masked shifts, comparisons, Boolean combinations, conditionals, local bindings and functions, and supported pure Id forms. It also includes
one bounded range loop with a word accumulator, supported positive literal strides, and specified
continue and break forms. The grammar and instance checks determine which elaborated forms
qualify. Heap arrays, the drone’s collection of recursive helpers, and general effectful programs
require the broader compilation route and additional proofs.
The checked compiler theorem is universal over admitted programs. Native Lean/WASM
comparisons test its implementation interfaces and tool integration. The main branch’s task.md
retains passing general theorem audits and focused execution checks, while identifying broader tests
inherited from parent revisions.

2.3

Artifact proofs and trust assumptions

An exact-artifact proof embeds the bytes of a particular WASM module in Lean, proves decoding
and validation results, connects the decoded module to the execution model, and applies a behavioral
theorem. The claim concerns those bytes and the theorem’s input, memory, and host assumptions.
Compiler annotations help locate code and reusable lemmas, while checked equalities establish that
the cited instruction regions have the required form.
LeanExe uses the pinned Talos interpreter and proof libraries for WASM execution. The
WebAssembly specification supplies the language’s external reference [4]. The formal trust boundary
includes Lean’s kernel, the audited standard axioms, and the definitions of source semantics, decoding,
validation, and execution. Native environment loading, CLI I/O, Wasmtime, the operating system,
and physical hardware receive empirical checks outside those Lean theorems. The independent core
type-safety development proves preservation and progress for its own typed syntax and semantics.
The drone result uses a checked generated model and program-specific execution proofs. The
larger project also has exact-binary examples.
3

3

Terrain, states, and output interpretation

3.1

Input domain and clearance corridor

An input terrain is an array h = (h0 , . . . , hn−1 ) of UInt64 values. Accepted input satisfies n ≤ 64
and 0 ≤ hi ≤ 106 . Heights are relative to a common datum. The model uses abstract distance
units and seconds. Consecutive terrain stations lie 100 distance units apart. Terrain height between
stations is linear in horizontal position. A caller using signed elevations can choose and remove a
datum before invoking the unsigned entry, but that preprocessing lies outside the raw function’s
specification.
Define the station floor
0
100

(

ri = hi + ci ,

ci =

i = 0 or i = n − 1,
0 < i < n − 1.

The required corridor R(x) linearly interpolates the ri at x = 100i. Thus the first and last segments
contain takeoff and landing ramps in required clearance. Every segment whose endpoints are both
interior stations maintains 100 units above the linearly interpolated terrain. A two-station input
has zero required offset throughout its sole segment. These conventions make continuous departure
from and arrival at the ground compatible with the corridor.
The program returns an empty array for empty input, more than 64 stations, or a height above
106 . A singleton [h0 ] returns [h0 , 0] and defines a constant stopped path of zero duration. The
nonempty safety theorem therefore includes n = 1 as a separate case. The compiled exact-output
theorem also covers every empty and rejected input satisfying its caller-memory assumptions.

3.2

Finite states and component limits

At station i, state q ∈ {0, . . . , 44} determines
zi (q) = ri + 25 ⌊q/5⌋ ,

u(q) = 5(q mod 5).

There are nine altitude offsets from 0 through 200 and five horizontal speeds from 0 through 20.
The first and final states are zero. Vertical velocity is zero at each station. The output array records
[z0 , u0 , z1 , u1 , . . . , zn−1 , un−1 ]. The speed word denotes horizontal waypoint speed. The interpolation
below defines vertical speed and motion between stations.
The point-mass limits are
0 ≤ vx ≤ 20,

|vz | ≤ 20,

|ax | ≤ 1,

|az | ≤ 4.

The model permits independent net horizontal and vertical acceleration. Gravity is absorbed into net
vertical acceleration. Horizontal motion is forward, with braking and stops allowed. The trajectory
has continuous position and velocity, while acceleration can jump at station times. A model of a
vehicle’s available thrust, attitude, or jerk would impose further constraints.

4

Motion primitives and continuous safety

4.1

Moving edges

Consider one segment, with floor endpoints r0 , r1 , altitude endpoints z0 , z1 , and horizontal speeds
u, v. Write d = |z1 − z0 |, ∆z = z1 − z0 , and s = t/T ∈ [0, 1]. If u + v > 0, the primitive has duration
4

and position
200
,
u+v
x(t) = x0 + 100q(s),

2us + (v − u)s2
,
u+v
z(t) = z0 + ∆z p(s),
p(s) = 3s2 − 2s3 .

T =

q(s) =

(1)
(2)

Its derivatives are
v 2 − u2
,
200
∆z(6 − 12s)
.
az (t) =
T2

vx (t) = (1 − s)u + sv,
vz (t) =

ax (t) =

6∆z s(1 − s)
,
T

(3)
(4)

Endpoint speeds in [0, 20] bound vx throughout. The executable tests
|v 2 − u2 | ≤ 200,

3d(u + v) ≤ 8000,

6d(u + v)2 ≤ 160000

(5)

give the remaining component bounds. For example, 6s(1 − s) ≤ 3/2 and |6 − 12s| ≤ 6 on [0, 1].
Substitution of T from (1) then gives the vertical speed and acceleration inequalities. The Lean proofs
connect these real inequalities to the integer tests after establishing the required word-arithmetic
bounds.

4.2

Bernstein clearance certificate

The floor below the moving point is r0 + (r1 − r0 )q(s). The clearance gap has the exact cubic
Bernstein representation
z(t) − R(x(t)) = b0 (1 − s)3 + 3b1 s(1 − s)2 + 3b2 s2 (1 − s) + b3 s3 ,
b0 = z0 − r0 ,
b1 = z0 − r0 −

(6)
b3 = z1 − r1 ,

2u(r1 − r0 )
,
3(u + v)

b2 = z1 − r1 +

2v(r1 − r0 )
.
3(u + v)

Each basis term is nonnegative on [0, 1]. Consequently, nonnegative coefficients suffice for clearance
throughout the segment. State decoding guarantees b0 , b3 ≥ 0. On an uphill segment b2 ≥ 0 follows
from the endpoint margin, leaving the integer check
3(u + v)(z0 − r0 ) ≥ 2u(r1 − r0 ).
On a downhill segment b1 ≥ 0 follows, leaving
3(u + v)(z1 − r1 ) ≥ 2v(r0 − r1 ).
Equality of the floor heights fits either branch. Motion.clearance_identity proves (6), bern
stein_nonneg proves the sign argument, and Edges.state_edge_clearance connects accepted
word-level edges to this real certificate.
The certificate is sufficient and conservative. A cubic can remain nonnegative even when a
Bernstein coefficient is negative. The admitted graph contains the edges passing the implemented
coefficient tests. Its optimality theorem uses that exact edge relation.

5

4.3

Rest-to-rest edges and feasibility

When u = v = 0, both coordinates use the same cubic progress:
x(t) = x0 + 100p(s),

z(t) = z0 + ∆z p(s).

The duration is a whole number of seconds,


s

3d 
,
T = max 25,
40 







3d 
.
2


(7)

The horizontal maxima are 150/T for speed and 600/T 2 for acceleration. The bound T ≥ 25 suffices
for both horizontal limits. The other terms in (7) ensure 3d ≤ 40T and 3d ≤ 2T 2 , giving the vertical
limits. The code computes the square-root term as the integer ceiling square root of ⌈3d/2⌉, which
has the same least adequate integer value.
Shared progress makes the clearance gap
(1 − p(s))(z0 − r0 ) + p(s)(z1 − r1 ) ≥ 0.
Therefore an edge between floor-height stopped states is feasible for every bounded adjacent pair of
floors. Induction supplies an all-stop route across every accepted terrain. Feasibility.all_stop
_flight proves this witness, and terminal_finite transfers it to the planner’s terminal row. The
public function can reconstruct the terminal state for every accepted nonempty terrain without a
separate unreachable-result case.

5

Exact integer search and graph optimality

5.1

Tick arithmetic and overflow bounds

The planner compares traversal times in integer ticks, with 840 ticks per second. A moving edge
has u + v = 5k for 1 ≤ k ≤ 8 and returns 33600/k ticks. Every such k divides 33600. Thus
200
33600/k
=
=T
840
5k
holds exactly. A rest edge returns 840T . The edge function reserves zero ticks for rejection. The
distinct unreachable-row sentinel is 1012 .
The proof interprets every relevant UInt64 computation as a natural-number computation
within bounds. Floor height is at most 1,000,100 and altitude at most 1,000,300. The speed sum is
at most 40. Products in the edge guards remain below 264 . The binary square-root search starts
with interval [0, 65536], uses explicit fuel 17, and returns the least integer whose square is adequate
for input below 232 . Sqrt.ceilSqrt_correct proves both adequacy and minimality.
The proved upper bounds keep reachable costs distinct from the sentinel and within the word
modulus:
Quantity

Proved bound

Rest-edge duration
Any edge cost
Reachable time after i segments
Reachable altitude-excess sum after i segments
Actual route length

75,023 seconds
63,019,320 ticks
i · 63,019,320 ticks
200i
At most 63 segments

6

The row proofs allow a conservative 64-step bound. The reachable totals stay below the sentinel and
the word modulus. Costs.predecessor_exact establishes the natural-number meaning of both
accumulated costs and the stored parent index. This result connects the machine comparisons to
the mathematical ordering used by the optimality proof.

5.2

Bellman recurrence and tie behavior

A cost is a pair C = (τ, e) ∈ N2 , ordered lexicographically by traversal ticks and then altitude excess.
Each admitted transition from source state a to target state b contributes
wi (a, b) = edgeTicksi (a, b), 25⌊b/5⌋ .


For each target, the executable predecessor scan computes the minimum of Ci (a) + wi (a, b) over
reachable admitted predecessors. A strict improvement replaces the incumbent. A candidate with
equal time replaces it only if the excess is smaller. Complete ties preserve the first predecessor
encountered in ascending source-state order. The secondary objective is the sum of waypoint offsets
above the corridor floor.
Initially only state zero has cost (0, 0). The last row admits only target state zero. Each row
stores three scalar words per state: time, excess, and parent. The formal row invariant states that
every finite entry is attained by a feasible graph prefix, every feasible prefix reaches a finite entry,
and the stored cost is no larger than that prefix’s cost. Planner.initial_correct establishes
the invariant, advance_correct preserves it, and layers_optimal gives an attaining minimum at
each reachable terminal state. This is a finite layered dynamic program in the sense of the discrete
planning formulation in LaValle [3].
The proof uses the executable initial and advance arrays. The separate abstract certificate
theorem in Optimality.lean states the reusable principle that local lower-bound inequalities
plus an attaining route establish a global minimum. The planner-specific induction establishes
attainment and lower bounds for the concrete recurrence. The resulting optimum applies to the
executable row recurrence.

5.3

Stored parents and the public result

buildHistory iterates the row transition and appends the 45 parent words from each completed
row to a flat history array. History.computed_history_valid relates index (i − 1)45 + q to the
stored parent for state q at station i. Starting with terminal state zero, unwind traverses these
parents backward, appends speed and altitude to a reversed accumulator, and reverses that array at
completion.
The inductive predicate Output.Encoded connects an output word list to a feasible graph route
and its exact cost. Its step constructor requires the same admitted-edge predicate used by the
executable planner. Output.unwind_words connects the tail-recursive reconstruction loop to the
proved parent traversal.
Theorem 1 (Source route correctness). For 1 ≤ n ≤ 64 and elevations at most 106 , compute returns
exactly 2n words encoding a feasible route from state zero to state zero. Its cost is lexicographically
no larger than the cost of any feasible route in the implemented graph. Its first pair is [h0 , 0] and its
last pair is [hn−1 , 0].
The proof composes exact row fields, bounded predecessor costs, Bellman induction, terminal
feasibility, history correspondence, and the reconstruction theorem. Output.compute_invalid and
compute_empty give the rejection results. The graph restricts altitude and speed choices, vertical
7

waypoint velocity, motion primitives, forward motion, and clearance certificates. Each of these
restrictions is part of the theorem’s optimization domain.
The search evaluates at most 452 candidate transitions per layer. Its graph-operation count is
O(n452 ) and its parent history uses O(n45) words. The implementation’s array allocations and
copies add work. The allocation proof below accounts for that behavior separately from the abstract
graph-operation count.

6

Whole-flight composition

Segment-wise bounds become a whole-flight theorem only after connecting local time, spatial
interpolation, and the returned words. Let Ti be the duration decoded from adjacent output pairs
and set t0 = 0, ti+1 = ti + Ti . The final time is tf = tn−1 . Gluing.stitch constructs global
coordinate and velocity functions on these intervals. The functions agree with their local primitives
at every time in each closed segment.
Horizontal endpoint velocities equal the adjacent speed words, and each primitive has zero
vertical endpoint velocity. Successive primitives share the same returned altitude and speed at their
common station. Their positions and first derivatives therefore agree at joins, including a change
between moving and rest-to-rest primitives. Trajectory.compute_global_smooth proves that
global position is differentiable, its derivative is the defined velocity, and velocity is continuous.
For n > 1, all Ti are positive. The cumulative intervals cover [0, tf ]. WholeFlight.compute_no
rmalized_cover expresses any flight time as ti + sTi for some segment and s ∈ [0, 1]. Corridor.h
eight_on_segment identifies the corridor at the horizontal point, and compute_spatial_segment
proves clearance there. This connection ensures that the clearance theorem refers to the spatial
terrain below the vehicle, even though horizontal progress q(s) differs from normalized time s.
Theorem 2 (Whole-flight safety). For every accepted nonempty terrain, the path decoded from
compute has continuous position and velocity. On [0, tf ] it satisfies
0 ≤ x(t) ≤ 100(n − 1),

R(x(t)) ≤ z(t),

0 ≤ vx (t) ≤ 20,

|vz (t)| ≤ 20.

It departs from (0, h0 ) and arrives at (100(n − 1), hn−1 ) with both velocity components zero. At
every flight time other than a waypoint time, the derivatives of the global velocity functions exist and
satisfy |ax | ≤ 1 and |az | ≤ 4. The corresponding derivatives within each closed segment satisfy those
bounds at its endpoints as well. A singleton terrain has zero duration and a constant stopped path.
WholeFlight.Safe records these fields, and WholeFlight.compute_safe proves the structure.
The acceleration statements distinguish ordinary derivatives between joins from derivatives within
each adjacent interval at a join. Left and right accelerations may differ. The formal global functions
extend beyond the flight interval using the stitching definition. The physical safety claim applies on
[0, tf ].

7

Compiled execution and memory

7.1

Caller assumptions and exact postcondition

The compiled theorem uses a one-pointer array ABI. The caller supplies a valid heap and a live
terrain array that the callee borrows. BorrowedWords requires a valid root, enough capacity for
a length word and the data words, exact array contents in memory, placement below the heap

8

top, and separation from every free-list region. The callee reads that terrain without releasing it.
Allocation and release lemmas preserve this relation as the heap changes.
Let B = 37,580,992 bytes and P = 1024 WASM pages, each of size 65,536 bytes. The
OutputBudget precondition requires
heapTop +B < 232 ,

heapTop +B ≤ P · 65536,

initialPages ≤ P,

P ≤ memoryCapS (M, 0).

Here M is Project.Drone.module, S is the initial store, and memoryCapS (M, 0) is the page limit
returned by Wasm.Store.memoryCap for memory index zero. It uses the store's recorded limit when
present and otherwise the module's declared maximum, capped by the interpreter's hard limit. The
general predicate also bounds P by 65,536. Thus 64 MiB is a limit on total linear memory, including
the caller’s existing heap. The required headroom is a conservative allocation budget within that
limit.
Theorem 3 (Generated-model execution). For every host environment, initial store, valid caller
heap, and borrowed terrain array satisfying the stated budget, function 25 of the checked drone module
terminates. It returns one pointer containing exactly compute terrain, preserves the terrain array,
and leaves linear memory at most 64 MiB. The result covers all input lengths and height words,
including the rejected-input branches.
This is Project.Drone.Spec.compute_correct. Its result predicate ResultAt existentially
identifies the output pointer and asserts exact array contents, preservation of the input contents,
and the memory bound. The stronger internal Execution.compute_exact returns a valid updated
heap, a fresh owned result, preserved caller-live arrays, and the remaining budget. The public
theorem derives its smaller postcondition from those facts.
Spec.compute_safe combines the exact output theorem with WholeFlight.compute_safe
under the accepted, nonempty input assumptions. Its safety field describes the mathematical
trajectory derived from the source output. Exact memory equality identifies that output with the
returned compiled words. The source optimality theorem transfers by the same equality, and the
named SafeSpecFor packages the whole-flight safety property.

7.2

Execution proof structure

The execution development follows the generated function boundaries. It first proves scalar helpers,
bounded square-root search, terrain reads, and height validation. Edge proofs establish exact costs
from the accepted and rejected branches. Predecessor, scan, and row proofs connect the generated
loops to source selection. History construction composes row allocation, parent appending, and
release. Reconstruction follows checked parent indices, constructs the reverse result, and copies it into
the final order. The public dispatch composes length checks, height checks, accepted computation,
and allocated empty results.
Frame lemmas describe parameters, saved locals, loop variables, and scratch slots at each
boundary. Checked instruction-list equalities connect those descriptions to the generated Program.
lean. Shared array lemmas handle bounded reads, allocation, word writes, copy loops, reversal,
and release. These proofs expose ownership and budget changes in their postconditions so that the
next call receives the conditions it requires.
The development record documents a composition error caught during proof construction: toplevel compute passes the terrain with owner zero, while earlier history and unwind lemmas expected
an owned terrain pointer. The corrected frames use the borrowed-input convention. Preservation
9

lemmas establish that allocation and release preserve the terrain array. The distinction is operational:
a nonzero data pointer and a zero ownership marker describe a readable caller-owned array.
Separating parameter preparation from the history append call resolved a 200,000-heartbeat
elaboration limit. A root-bound lemma also avoided expanding a source row computation when
proving that an owned pointer was nonzero. The final nested branch used an explicit last-instruction
boundary. These changes retained the execution statements and made intermediate frame equalities
explicit. The audited principal theorems depend only on propext, Classical.choice, and
Quot.sound, as applicable.

7.3

Allocation budget derivation

The budget charges for every possible allocation even when the free list supplies reusable storage.
This makes the upper bound independent of successful reuse. Let c be a remaining iteration count
and s the current array length. The checked formulas in ExecutionComputeCost.lean are
A(c, s) = c(60 + 8s) + 4c2 ,
D(c, s) = c(180 + 24s) + 36c2 ,
H(c, s) = c(83756 + 360s) + 8100c2 ,
U (c, s) = 56 + 8s + c(136 + 16s) + 16c2 .
Here A accounts for appending parent words, D for row construction, H for history construction,
and U for reconstruction and reversal. With natural truncated subtraction for n − 1, the complete
accepted-path budget is
C(n) = 56 + D(45, 0) + 56 + H(n − 1, 0) + 56 + U (n, 0).
Induction proves the formulas from the per-operation budgets. Their coefficients are nonnegative,
so the input bound yields
n ≤ 64 =⇒ C(n) ≤ 37,580,992.
The empty-result path fits the same public bound. This is a sufficient allocation bound. It is
separate from a measurement of peak live storage or process resident memory.
The proof models copying and release with their concrete memory effects. It preserves live caller
arrays and tracks the free list. The public result leaves the returned array allocated for the caller.
A repeated-call application must also supply a verified lifecycle for its inputs and returned arrays if
it needs a theorem about an entire session.

8

Example and validation evidence

A fresh native Lean run and a Wasmtime run of the compiled planner both return, for terrain
[0, 20, 80, 40, 0],
[0, 0, 145, 10, 180, 15, 165, 10, 0, 0].
The four moving durations are 20, 8, 8, 20 seconds, giving 56 seconds or 47,040 ticks. The corridor
floors are [0, 120, 180, 140, 0], and the selected altitude offsets are [0, 25, 0, 25, 0]. The secondary
cost is therefore 50. Figure 1 plots the trajectory specified by these words and the exact primitive
equations. The figure illustrates the continuous interpretation, whose safety follows from the
universal theorem.

10

Five-station example

Elevation (distance units)

200

150

100

50

0

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

Horizontal position (distance units)
Terrain

Required corridor

Drone elevation

Figure 1: The five-station example. Clearance is measured at horizontal position. The first and last
corridor segments contain takeoff and landing ramps.
The drone branch's task.md reports tests of 48 accepted WASM routes against an independent
graph planner, four empty or rejected inputs, and 12 native Lean/WASM comparisons. Earlier checks
included exhaustive short-route optima, translated and reversed terrain, and sampled continuous
bounds. Those test drivers and raw logs belonged to the development workspace and were excluded
from its committed scope. These results are retained here as attributed development evidence. The
committed Lean theorems provide the inspectable universal statements.
The same record reports a fresh compiler/model comparison followed by the specification build on
September 26, 2026. It also states that the binary was outside the committed artifact packages and
that the drone registration used by that local check was excluded from the commit. Consequently,
reproduction from the committed branch uses the explicit Lean targets below. The report-specific
build of Project.Drone.Spec and Project.Drone.SourceChecks passed on September 26, 2026.
A separate audit of the principal source, allocation, and execution theorems lists only propext,
Classical.choice, and Quot.sound, as applicable. A freshly compiled module also reproduced all
five report examples in Wasmtime, with exact native Lean agreement.
tools/leanrun --timeout 15m lake -q -d proofs/talos/lean build \
Project.Drone.Spec Project.Drone.SourceChecks
tools/leanrun --timeout 2m lake env lean --run \
test/DroneNative.lean 0 20 80 40 0

The pinned setup uses Lean 4.34.0-rc2 and the repository’s Talos dependency. The repository
runner enforces the local resource policy and serializes Lean work. The proof build checks the
whole-flight source result and the compiled specification in the same dependency graph. Its printed
axiom dependencies allow review of the final result’s logical assumptions. Main’s compiler theorem
has its own tools/arithmetic-check.js proof command on that branch. The compiler account
uses main’s theorem source and retained integration evidence. The report-specific builds used the
11

drone checkout.

8.1

Fresh terrain runs

Figures 2 and 3 show four additional runs of the compiled planner. Each input contains 15 stations
spanning 1,400 distance units. The figures use the returned altitude and speed words, evaluated
with the prescribed continuous primitives at 101 normalized times per segment. Markers identify
the returned waypoints. The filled region is the piecewise-linear terrain, and the dashed curve is the
required corridor. The plotted horizontal coordinate follows the primitive’s progress function.
Every returned word agrees with a separate native Lean invocation on the same input. The
report retains the complete inputs, both outputs, exact tick totals, and plotting samples in its figure
data. The four routes have the same time, 90,240/840 = 107 37 seconds, while their selected altitude
excess differs. In these cases the planner preserves the same waypoint-speed sequence and adjusts
altitude to satisfy the terrain constraints. Table 1 records the resulting secondary costs. These new
runs are distinct from the historical 15-station examples in the development record.
Terrain

Sampled altitude excess

Flat
Broad plateau
Rounded hill
Repeated ridges

0
300
850
800

Table 1: Fresh compiled runs. The secondary cost sums altitude offsets above the station floors.

12

Elevation (distance units)

Flat terrain

300

200

100

0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1,000 1,100 1,200 1,300 1,400

Horizontal position (distance units)
Terrain

Required corridor

Drone elevation

Elevation (distance units)

Broad plateau

300

200

100

0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1,000 1,100 1,200 1,300 1,400

Horizontal position (distance units)
Terrain

Required corridor

Drone elevation

Figure 2: Fresh WASM outputs on flat terrain and a broad plateau. The flat route follows the
100-unit interior floor. The plateau route gains altitude before the rising terrain. Native Lean
returns the same waypoint words.

13

Elevation (distance units)

Rounded hill

300

200

100

0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1,000 1,100 1,200 1,300 1,400

Horizontal position (distance units)
Terrain

Required corridor

Drone elevation

Elevation (distance units)

Repeated ridges

300

200

100

0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1,000 1,100 1,200 1,300 1,400

Horizontal position (distance units)
Terrain

Required corridor

Drone elevation

Figure 3: Fresh WASM outputs on a rounded hill and repeated ridges. The planner selects a path
above the corridor where doing so preserves traversal time. All four 15-station plots share the same
axis limits.

14

9

Assumptions, remaining work, and related methods

The result assumes an ideal point mass with exact piecewise-linear terrain and exact execution of
the returned interpolation. Terrain errors, state-estimation errors, delays, wind, tracking error, and
coupled acceleration authority would change the safety problem. The present clearance corridor
also fixes specific takeoff and landing ramps. A safety theorem for a physical vehicle would need to
relate those additional quantities to the trajectory and its reserved margins.
The graph’s finite state choices and primitive family determine optimality. The secondary cost
sums altitude excess at stations. The conservative Bernstein certificate may remove safe continuous
edges from consideration. The all-stop witness establishes existence within this graph even for steep
accepted terrain, at the cost of longer travel time. Claims about a larger continuous control problem
require a relation between that problem and the finite graph.
The generated-model proof establishes exact execution under explicit heap conditions. A
complete drone binary package would additionally prove decoding, validation, and equality between
the decoded binary and Project.Drone.module. The main-branch general compiler result gives
those connections for its admitted arithmetic language. Extending that theorem to the drone’s heap
arrays and recursive call structure is another possible route, with a broader proof obligation. Host
marshaling and the native WASM engine remain external execution assumptions in either approach.
Finite motion primitives and dynamic programming are established planning methods [3]. This
development fixes a small primitive family so that exact word arithmetic, continuous polynomial
safety, and compiled execution can be connected in one proof chain. Its contribution is that
connection for the implemented planner and its returned array.

A

Claim-to-theorem guide

All drone names in Table 2 are relative to Project.Drone. The source is LeanExe/Examples/Dro
ne.lean, and the proof statements and dependencies are in proofs/talos/lean/Project/Drone/.
Compiler results use the Project.Compiler.ArithmeticModule namespace in main's proofs/t
alos/lean/Project/Compiler/SourceCorrectness.lean. The report's companion files retain
source revisions, proof-audit output, run inputs and outputs, and figure data.
Table 2: Theorem endpoints used by the report.
Claim

Declaration

Ceiling square root
Rest duration bounds
Continuous accepted-edge
clearance
Exact moving duration in ticks
Non-wrapping predecessor costs
Executable row optimum
Accepted-input feasibility

Sqrt.ceilSqrt_correct
Arithmetic.restSeconds_bounds
Edges.state_edge_clearance

Parent-history correspondence
Output feasibility and optimality
Rejected input and endpoints
Global position and velocity

Timing.state_ticks_exact
Costs.predecessor_exact
Planner.advance_correct, Planner.layers_optimal
Feasibility.all_stop_flight,
Feasibility.terrain_terminal_optimal
History.computed_history_valid
Output.unwind_words, Output.compute_correct
Output.compute_invalid, Output.compute_empty,
Output.compute_endpoints
Trajectory.compute_global_smooth

15

Claim

Declaration

Spatial corridor identification

Corridor.height_on_segment,
Corridor.compute_spatial_segment
WholeFlight.compute_normalized_cover
WholeFlight.compute_safe
WholeFlight.compute_acceleration_away_from_joins,
Trajectory.compute_global_acceleration_within
Execution.computeCost_bound
Execution.compute_exact
Spec.compute_correct, Spec.compute_safe
compileEnvironment_correct

Every-time flight coverage
Whole-flight safety
Global acceleration bounds
Allocation bound
Exact compiled output and heap
Public compiled result
General compiler admission and
correctness
Successful compilation implies
correctness

compileEnvironment_sound

References
[1] Codex GPT-6 and Jamie Stephens. The LeanExe subset: Types, extraction, and execution. Technical
Report 2609.00005v6, marXiv, 2026. https://morphism.com/marxiv/abs/2609.00005v6/.
[2] Leonardo de Moura, Soonho Kong, Jeremy Avigad, Floris van Doorn, and Jakob von Raumer. The Lean
theorem prover (system description). In Automated Deduction: CADE-25, pages 378–388. Springer, 2015.
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/the-lean-theorem-prover-system-d
escription/.
[3] Steven M. LaValle. Planning Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2006. Chapters 2 and 14.
https://msl.cs.uiuc.edu/planning/.
[4] WebAssembly Community Group. WebAssembly core specification. https://webassembly.github.io/
spec/core/, 2026. Accessed September 26, 2026. The report’s checked proofs use the repository-pinned
Talos semantics.

16

