Checked WGSL Compilation and Conditional GPT-2 Execution in
                        LeanExe
                                   Codex GPT-6, Jamie Stephens

                                          19 September 2026


                                                Abstract
          The goal of LeanExe is to run an algorithm written in Lean and obtain a checked proof that
      the emitted program performs that algorithm. Previous work established this connection for
      cached GPT-2 inference in a formal WebAssembly execution model. The WGSL work extends
      the approach toward GPU execution by moving matrix products to the WebGPU Shading
      Language (WGSL) while retaining the model controller in WebAssembly. We present a compiler
      for a restricted class of Lean definitions that checks each translation against an independent
      shader parser and a statement-execution semantics. Packed-layout proofs connect six compiled
      shaders to the matrix operations of a 124M-parameter GPT-2 implementation. The hybrid
      session theorem equates cache and logit bytes with the Lean cached-step recurrence for arbitrary
      weight bytes of the required length and up to 128 valid tokens, assuming completed shader
      execution with separate FP32 arithmetic and exact host transfers. The branch supplies a native
      inference runner and records a CPU WebGPU comparison in which all 6,432,896 logits match
      the parent WebAssembly implementation bit for bit. The outcome is a checked source-to-shader
      method and a conditional proof for the combined inference program. Runtime conformance,
      hybrid binary decoding, and browser execution remain separate verification or evaluation tasks.
      The report records the scope and results of a source review and fresh proof checks.


1     Goal, motivation, and outcome
1.1   Lean programs and GPU execution
LeanExe’s overall goal is to execute an algorithm specified in Lean and obtain a checked proof that
the emitted program computes the same result. For neural-network inference, that result includes
the floating-point output words and updated model state. The specification fixes operation order,
tensor representation, and the rules for updating the cache. The preceding GPT-2 development
applied this approach to a pretrained 124M-parameter model with a 128-token context, using
WebAssembly as the execution target [1].
    The WGSL work was undertaken to extend this verification approach to GPU execution. A
matrix product’s output coordinates can be computed independently, making those operations a
target for parallel execution. The development plan selected FP32 matrix multiplication for the first
compute kernels and retained control flow and the remaining model operations in WebAssembly [2].
WebGPU provides the compute interface, and WGSL specifies the shader programs submitted
through it. The intended benefit is faster matrix computation through GPU parallelism while
preserving a proof connection to the Lean algorithm. The execution evidence in this report comes
from a CPU implementation of WebGPU.
    Moving a matrix operation to a shader creates proof obligations at both the computation and
calling interface. The emitted shader must implement the selected Lean operation with the required

                                                     1
indexing and arithmetic order. The combined program must supply the right bytes, complete the
dispatch, return the result to Wasm memory, and preserve the state needed by the next operation.
WGSL’s permitted floating-point choices also require an explicit arithmetic assumption for exact
word equality [5]. The work therefore develops shader certificates, packed-layout proofs, and
controller proofs that compose through a stated host interface.

1.2   Implemented and checked result
The branch supplies a compiler for a bounded subset of Lean, a native GPT-2 inference runner
combining Wasm and WGSL, and generated proofs relating that combined program to the parent
Lean specification. Its six shader definitions cover the four matrix-product roles in each transformer
block and the two slices of the vocabulary projection. The integration journal records successful
proof checks, text completions, and a full 128-context CPU comparison with the parent Wasm
implementation [15, 16]. The proofs connect shader computation and the Wasm controller to the
Lean algorithm under the execution assumptions stated below. Physical-GPU behavior and browser
execution remain evaluation tasks.
    The hybrid session theorem equates cache and logit bytes with the Lean cached-step recurrence
for arbitrary weight bytes of the required length and up to 128 valid tokens, assuming completed
shader execution with separate FP32 arithmetic and exact host transfers. The public declarations
are Project.Gpt2Hybrid.Spec.cachedStep_exact, gpt2_128_exact, and gpt2_128_exact_for.
A build generates these declarations by replaying the parent controller proofs against the hybrid
module and the six shader certificates. The integration journal records their successful Lean checks
and axiom audits [11, 16].
    The parent report establishes an exact-binary WebAssembly result for the same Lean algorithm [1].
Its specification is LeanExe.Models.Gpt2.cachedStep, including the cache layout, scalar FP32
operation order, and selected exponential and activation routines. Talos is the WebAssembly
interpreter and proof library written in Lean used by that verification. The WGSL branch reuses
the parent’s Talos instruction proofs and its binary32 arithmetic extensions.
    The reviewed source is the wgsl branch at revision ba9f02ce930243a3d35d4d10df6f9c97850c
a1e8. It pins Lean 4.34.0-rc2 and Talos revision 87e3aa5e8f6e6f3b3eb5e7e4c5aba43071002d47.
The earlier report’s version 7 also proves decoding and validation of a frozen parent WebAssembly
binary. The hybrid changes that binary by adding imports and replacing matrix implementations.
Its present proof starts from the module declarations produced by an external parser. Extending
the parent’s binary certificate to those changed bytes remains a separate obligation [1, 13].
    The runtime keeps embedding, normalization, attention, activations, residuals, cache construction,
and control flow in Lean-generated WebAssembly. Four products per transformer block and two
vocabulary slices execute as WGSL. The model has twelve blocks, hidden width 768, feed-forward
width 3072, and 50,257 vocabulary entries. Weights occupy 497,759,232 bytes. Each token extends
the cache by 73,728 bytes and returns 201,028 logit bytes [15]. These sizes determine the theorem’s
memory and index premises.


2     Per-compilation shader certificates
2.1   Lean source subset
The compiler accepts a monomorphic annotated Lean definition of type

           ScalarArithmetic → (N → UInt32) → (N → UInt32) → N → N → UInt32.


                                                  2
The five arguments supply scalar operations, input buffers A and B, and output coordinates. A
UInt32 represents a floating-point word. The add and mul fields of ScalarArithmetic specify its
arithmetic [3]. For example, an ordered matrix cell is expressed by

@[wgsl] def matrix : Source.Kernel := fun ar a b row col =>
  Source.fold 4 0 fun k acc =>
    ar.add acc (ar.mul (a (row * 4 + k)) (b (k * 3 + col)))

The definition’s elaborated body determines the emitted computation. Transparent helpers, word
and index bindings, nested literal-count folds, finite word constants, buffer reads, addition, and
multiplication belong to the supported subset. Index expressions use naturals, coordinates, fold
indices, addition, and multiplication. The implementation bounds normalization and rejects
unsupported residual expressions. Runtime branches, dynamic iteration, barriers, atomics, and
shared-memory communication lie outside this grammar [3].
     Every fold count is at most 65,535. Static access checks bound each index expression and its
intermediate arithmetic, preventing u32 overflow and out-of-range reads. Constants must encode
finite binary32 values, including constants in unused bindings. Input buffer words remain unrestricted.
The emitted wrapper declares two read-only storage buffers, a distinct output buffer, an 8 × 8
workgroup, an edge guard, and one output store per active invocation [3, 4].

2.2   Parsing, source equality, and execution
The checker independently parses the emitted shader string into a statement program. It checks
the declarations, bindings, guard, loop initializer, comparison, increment, accumulator assignment,
lexical scope, final store, and complete token consumption. Parsed locals become indexed slots.
Bindings and loops remain statements in the syntax tree. The parser accepts the compiler’s restricted
WGSL grammar [3].
    For source function f , shader text s, parsed statement program P , and shape S, the compiler
constructs three certificates:

                                          parse(s) = ok(P ),                                       (1)
                                      f = interpretSource(P ),                                     (2)
                                        Implements(s, S, f ).                                      (3)

Equation (2) quantifies over both input buffers, both coordinates, and the scalar interpretation. Its
proof checks equality to the named Lean definition. An incorrect arithmetic operator or a custom
natural-number addition instance therefore has to satisfy the original source equality before the
checker can accept the shader [3].
   The Implements proposition quantifies over scalar interpretation a, memory M , output size c,
and u32 coordinates (r, q). With adequate buffer lengths, it states

                     runShader(s, a, M, c, r, q) = ok(expected(S, f, a, M, r, q)).

For an active coordinate, expected is a write of f (a, M.A, M.B, r, q) to rS.cols + q. For an inactive
coordinate, it is no write. The execution function can fail on a missing local, invalid load or store,
or exhausted loop budget. The theorem rules out each modeled failure [4].
    The shared proof establishes agreement between wrapping u32 index calculations and natural-
number source indices within the validated bounds. It then proves statement execution equal to
source interpretation, including local bindings and scope restoration. A loop tests its u32 counter,


                                                  3
executes its body, assigns the accumulator, and increments the counter. Its budget equals the literal
count, and the proof establishes that the guard becomes false before an additional body execution
is needed. This is a successful-execution result with bounded termination [4].
    Checking finishes synchronously before files are emitted. The parser reductions use kernel
evaluation. The compiler audits transitive dependencies of all three public certificates and permits
only propext, Classical.choice, and Quot.sound. It saves the shader, metadata, and Lean
declarations that can be checked again independently of compilation. The command #check_wgsl
applies the same proof requirements to an existing shader file [3]. File reading and writing remain
external operations around the theorem about the embedded string.

2.3   Dispatch and arithmetic scope
The body-compiler proof establishes one invocation’s semantics. Separate geometric lemmas prove
coverage by the rounded-up dispatch and distinct output addresses for distinct active cells. The
operational model assumes read-only inputs and a separate output buffer. A complete refinement to
the WebGPU execution model, including an external scheduler, remains outside these certificates [4].
    The strict GPT-2 instantiation uses the pure Talos binary32 addition and multiplication functions,
with source-ordered accumulation and separate rounding. Its specification includes signed zeros,
subnormals, and exceptional words. WGSL permits implementation choices involving reassociation,
fusion, subnormals, zero signs, and exceptional values [5]. Applying the exact theorem to a runtime
therefore requires more than acceptance of the shader by that runtime: execution must implement
the stated operations and preserve the represented words through loads, copies, and stores.
    The branch also contains an earlier fixed-template GEMM development. That path proves
termination and output correspondence under arbitrary interleavings in its own dispatch model,
and supports separate or locally fused accumulation. A fusion theorem characterizes each output
by a sequence of explicit per-step choices. Its numerical bounds and small-model mixed-precision
experiments use additional domain premises [6]. The current body compiler has its own source
and statement proofs. The older scheduler, fusion, and numerical theorems do not supply those
properties for the new grammar.


3     Connection to packed GPT-2 operations
3.1   Ordered products and byte layouts
The current integration compiles six kernel definitions. The four block products append bias words
to their matrix input view and perform bias addition after the dot product. Table 1 gives the shapes,
all with one output row [7].

            Operation                   Inner dimension      Output columns   Final bias
            QKV projection                             768             2304       Yes
            Attention projection                       768              768       Yes
            Feed-forward expansion                     768             3072       Yes
            Feed-forward projection                   3072              768       Yes
            Vocabulary, first slice                    768            25129       No
            Vocabulary, second slice                   768            25128       No

Table 1: Shader roles in each cached token step. The four block roles repeat across twelve blocks.



                                                  4
   Let word(W, i) read word i from packed byte array W . For matrix offset o, bias offset b, inner
dimension K, and column count N , the shader’s second input view is
                                      (
                                          word(W, o + i),       i < KN,
                             B(i) =
                                          word(W, b + i − KN ), i ≥ KN.

The source proof identifies the reads at kN + q with the parent’s matrix reads, and the read at
KN + q with its bias. Induction over the fold proves equality to the parent’s ordered dot-product
prefix. A separate arithmetic equality connects the Lean source’s logical FP32 operations to the
pure Talos operations for all input words [7].
   The tied token embedding is vocabulary-major in the parent weights. A vocabulary shader uses
the transposed view
                              Bs (kN + q) = word(W, (s + q)768 + k),
with (s, N ) = (0, 25129) or (25129, 25128). The split assigns each vocabulary column to one complete
768-term dot product. The composition theorem selects its shader, local column, and shifted output
address, preserving the operation order within every dot product [7].
    The resulting theorems biasedBytes_exact and vocabularyBytes_exact identify serialized
shader results with the parent’s linearRows and vocabularyHead byte arrays. The serializer’s total
definition maps an unsuccessful shader result to a default word. The preceding per-column theorem
proves success at every serialized column, so the byte equality eliminates that default case [8]. These
are equalities of word and byte computations without weight-magnitude premises.

3.2   Host imports and controller reuse
The hybrid module adds imports wgsl.linear and wgsl.vocabulary. Its Wasm wrappers allocate
packed output storage and call the imports. Function indices shift by two. The proof generator
checks the wrappers and unchanged function declarations against the independently parsed hybrid
module [13, 9].
    The reusable ImportShift relation identifies a closed set of unchanged functions, their renamed
direct calls, and the memory declaration. Its semantic transport theorem preserves interpreter
execution at every fuel value and therefore transports the parent’s total-correctness statements.
Functions in the selected set cannot call the changed matrix implementations. Controller segments
outside that set are checked again, with the replacement matrix theorems at their call sites [10, 11].
    The interface PackedBackend.Kernels contains the six shader texts and their Implements
proofs. PackedBackend.Code identifies the wrappers, allocator, memory mode, and imports in the
module. PackedBackend.Host specifies what the external calls do. For represented and protected
input buffers with adequate sizes and allocation resources, it requires the host to return the modeled
shader-output bytes in the allocated output and preserve the remaining store [9].
    The host premise concerns execution of the certified shader semantics. Equality of those shader
bytes to the parent matrix result follows from the packed-layout and arithmetic theorems. Combining
the two establishes exact returned lengths and bytes, ownership of the output, preservation of
protected memory, heap validity, and memory-capacity preservation. Those postconditions supply
the parent’s controller proofs with the facts needed for subsequent calls and releases [8, 9].




                                                    5
4     Conditional session theorem and deployment boundary
Let W be any 497,759,232-byte array and let t0 , . . . , tn−1 satisfy ti < 50257 and n ≤ 128. Define
the source trace by
                      C0 = ϵ,     (Ci+1 , Li ) = cachedStep(W, Ci , ti , i).
Here ϵ is the empty cache, and Li is the complete logit byte array. Under PackedBackend.Host,
the generated gpt2_128_exact theorem composes reset, weight allocation, the mathematical write
of W , successive inference calls, logit availability, and releases with this source trace. Its session
predicate observes cache and logit bytes in memory. Its call predicate, TerminatesWith, requires
success for every sufficiently large interpreter fuel [11, 12].
    The session derives its heap and buffer preconditions from initialization and preserves them
across token calls. The cached-step proof also covers rejected input lengths, token IDs, and positions.
The algorithm uses arbitrary weight words, including exceptional encodings. Consequently, the host
premise must hold for the corresponding strict word semantics if the theorem is applied on that full
domain. The source theorem supplies no assertion that a particular GPU satisfies this premise on
all weight arrays.
    Wasmtime is the standalone WebAssembly runtime used by the native host. The host enables its
Cranelift arithmetic NaN canonicalization mode, as in the parent implementation. Native WebGPU
dispatch and readback finish before an import returns to Wasm. GPU weight views use the matrix
offsets passed by Wasm, and the host invalidates cached views after overlapping external writes or
reset. A model session uses fifty matrix views [14].
    The browser implementation runs Wasm in a worker. Each import copies input words to shared
staging, sends a dispatch request, and waits for completion notification. The WebGPU host writes
result bytes to staging before waking the worker. Each browser run creates its own host and copies
the same weight bytes into Wasm and the host’s source buffer. The source and syntax checks exist,
but the branch records no completed browser execution test [14, 16].
    Tokenization, sampling, and the FP32-to-FP64 adapter that presents logit words to the Wasm
sampler lie outside the inference theorem [13].
    The hybrid theorem’s axiom audit permits the same three standard logical axioms as the parent.
Its explicit Host hypothesis is additional to that logical axiom list. An axiom audit alone cannot
discharge the hypothesis [11].


5     Execution evidence and review findings
5.1   Recorded native tests
The integration journal records execution of the pretrained checkpoint on SwiftShader’s CPU
WebGPU device. Across a forced 128-token sequence, all 6,432,896 candidate logit words matched
the parent Wasm outputs. Complete cache arrays matched at positions 0, 1, 126, and 127. Invalid-
input tests preserved allocator statistics and memory size, and cache restart tests reproduced the
outputs. The test implementation checks word equality explicitly [16, 17].
    The recorded PyTorch comparison reported agreement of all 128 argmax choices and a maximum
absolute logit difference of approximately 0.001541. Every logit satisfied the test tolerance 0.002 +
0.0001|reference|. The combined parent, hybrid, and reference comparison took approximately 114
seconds. This timing describes that test workload. It supplies no physical-GPU throughput estimate
or general numerical error bound [16, 17].
    The journal also records greedy text completions and a sampled parent/hybrid pair using the
same Wasm tokenizer and sampler, temperature 0.8, and seed 42. Both the sampled text and

                                                  6
logged logit bytes matched. The rebuilt source bundle reproduced these traces and passed focused
tokenizer, sampler, and invalid-request tests. Tokenization and sampling remain outside the formal
inference claim [16].
    The branch records eleven body-compiler examples with three certificates each and 63 exact CPU
WebGPU output checks. Twenty-four rejection cases cover unsupported source constructs, invalid
dimensions and accesses, non-finite constants, changed operations, altered loops, and malformed
stores. These tests inspect source dependence and rejection behavior in addition to ordinary matrix
execution [18].

5.2   Fresh review checks
The review rebuilt the shared body compiler, statement semantics, index proofs, and GPT-2 kernel
definitions in an isolated checkout of the cited revision. A focused Lean check proved source equality,
static validity, and invocation correctness for the pointwise-add example and audited the shared
index, execution, coverage, and disjoint-store theorems. Every printed dependency belonged to the
three-axiom allowance. Executable parsing accepted the emitted review shader [19].
    The extracted certificate corpus timed out on its first positive example after 90 seconds under
the repository’s one-core resource limit. A split diagnostic then checked the token-parser certificate
successfully, while the separate lexical certificate exceeded 60 seconds. This identifies lexical
certification as one reproduction bottleneck under these limits. The corpus therefore provides no
fresh all-cases pass on this machine. The full hybrid session replay and native checkpoint execution
were also not repeated during this review. Their reported outcomes above come from the branch’s
integration journal, whose generated proof objects and execution reports reside in ignored build
directories [19, 16].

5.3   Assurance and reproducibility findings
The examined Implements statement excludes the execution model’s failure cases, establishes
bounded loop execution, and specifies the output address. The packed connection then identifies
those results with the parent byte-array functions. The controller interface assumes shader execution
and transfer, while the matrix equivalence follows from checked lemmas. These distinctions support
the conditional session claim [4, 8, 9].
    The strongest portability limit is the strict arithmetic and host-execution premise. The sampled
CPU agreement supports the recorded executions. A browser or physical GPU needs separate
evidence for its behavior, and a universal claim would require a proof or enforced implementation
of the stated word semantics. The body compiler also needs a refinement theorem and dispatch
semantics before its invocation result can be presented as a theorem of a complete formal WGSL
execution model [5, 4].
    Reproducing the whole result requires rebuilding the generated certificates and preserving
their association with the files executed. The source gate checks the parent, generates the hybrid
module and shaders, checks wrapper and controller proofs, audits named public theorems, and
copies the artifacts into a bundle. The runner subsequently loads bundle files. Its manifest records
theorem names and assumptions, but supplies no independent proof that later file changes preserve
the checked program [13, 14]. The exact hybrid binary certificate and runtime artifact-identity
enforcement are open assurance tasks.
    Some status descriptions predate the completed controller proof. The older GPT-2 verification
guide still describes full-model composition as pending, and the module-generation CLI prints
the same status. The later packed guide, composition gate, and integration journal describe


                                                  7
the conditional complete-session result. Consolidating those descriptions and retaining portable
generated certificates and machine-readable test reports would make the branch’s current claim
easier to reproduce [15, 16, 13, 18].


6    Reproduction entry points
On a host with the repository’s pinned Lean toolchain and installed native dependencies, the
source-build and inference entry points are

tools/gpt2-packed build build/gpt2/packed-new
tools/gpt2-packed --prompt 'The purpose of science is' \
  --generate 16 --temperature 0

The build destination must be fresh. The source-build tool uses its configured Python environment
to prepare checkpoint assets. Inference uses Wasm and WGSL. The packed guide documents bundle
selection and generation settings [15, 13]. The review evidence records the focused Lean commands,
resource limits, and certificate timeout [19].


References
 [1] Codex GPT-6 and Jamie Stephens. Exact Execution Verification of Cached GPT-2 in Lean
     and WebAssembly. marXiv:2609.00011v7, 2026.

 [2] LeanExe. WGSL backend development plan, Purpose and Design Principles, and parent
     integration plan. Revision ba9f02ce.

 [3] LeanExe. Body compiler, independent statement parser, and supported source specification.
     Revision ba9f02ce, 2026.

 [4] LeanExe. Shader execution and Implements, statement semantics, statement correctness, and
     index bounds. Revision ba9f02ce.

 [5] W3C. WebGPU Shading Language. Candidate Recommendation Draft, 17 August 2026, Section
     15.7. https://www.w3.org/TR/2026/CRD-WGSL-20260817/#floating-point-evaluation.

 [6] LeanExe. Template dispatch semantics, fusion-choice correspondence, and earlier numerical
     and mixed-precision results. Revision ba9f02ce.

 [7] LeanExe. Packed kernel definitions and arithmetic, layout, and source-byte equalities. Revision
     ba9f02ce.

 [8] LeanExe. Shader execution to parent byte results and six-shader certificate generator. Revision
     ba9f02ce.

 [9] LeanExe. Kernel, code, and host interfaces and output and store-preservation lemmas. Revision
     ba9f02ce.

[10] LeanExe. Function-region transport with imports. Revision ba9f02ce.

[11] LeanExe. Hybrid controller and session proof generator. Revision ba9f02ce.



                                                 8
[12] LeanExe. Parent session theorem and source trace and observable session predicate. Revision
     ba9f02ce.

[13] LeanExe. Source build gate, hybrid module construction, and external parsing and wrapper
     checks. Revision ba9f02ce.

[14] LeanExe. Wasmtime host, native WebGPU imports, browser host, and Wasm worker. Revision
     ba9f02ce.

[15] LeanExe. Packed GPT-2 usage and proof scope. Revision ba9f02ce.

[16] LeanExe. Parent integration journal, especially “Full hybrid controller and 128-token session,”
     “Full 128-position execution comparison,” and “Rebuilt source bundle and delivery status.”
     Revision ba9f02ce.

[17] LeanExe. Full-context comparison test. Revision ba9f02ce.

[18] LeanExe. Body-compiler corpus, recorded outcomes, and earlier GPT-2 verification record.
     Revision ba9f02ce.

[19] Codex GPT-6. WGSL branch review and report evidence, 19 September 2026. LeanExe report
     sources and evidence.




                                                 9
