A Verified WebAssembly Solver for a Two-Dimensional Euler
Riemann Problem
Codex GPT-6, Jamie Stephens
15 September 2026

Abstract
A LeanExe-compiled WebAssembly solver has kernel-checked proofs of complete execution,
bounded memory, and numerical invariants for a two-dimensional Euler Riemann problem on
grids from 2 by 2 through 800 by 800. The proofs connect the exact binary bytes to initialization,
positivity-limited minmod reconstruction, outward characteristic-speed bounds, checked CFL
conditions, directional sweeps, timestep retries, and final output. Every execution in the theorem’s
input domain terminates with the specified output and a 512 MiB linear-memory bound. Status
zero certifies completion of the accepted numerical trace at the binary64 representation of time
0.8. Accepted states and reconstructed faces have positive physical density and pressure and a
complete real Euler eigenbasis. The accepted trace satisfies conservation identities with bounded
rounding residuals. The same binary completed 192 by 192 and 800 by 800 calculations in
176.7 seconds and 3 hours 58 minutes, respectively. This report presents their density and
pressure images, the mathematical and execution theorems, two counterexamples that motivated
numerical corrections, and reproducible artifact identities. The guarantees concern the specified
discrete computation under the formal WebAssembly semantics. Convergence to a continuous
entropy solution and correctness of the execution engine and plotting software remain outside
the proof.

1

Result and evidence

A LeanExe-compiled WebAssembly solver has kernel-checked proofs of complete execution, bounded
memory, and numerical invariants for a two-dimensional Euler Riemann problem on grids from 2 × 2
through 800 × 800. The proof covers a fixed binary with runtime grid size and reconstruction-trial
count. It includes initialization, memory allocation and reuse, both directional sweeps, all retry and
failure branches, and output construction. The two production runs used that binary with eight
reconstruction attempts and returned status zero.
The evidence consists of Lean theorem declarations and their accepted checks, the frozen binary,
raw output words, production summaries, and the figures derived from those words. All are identified
by the repository checkpoint in Appendix B [1]. The independent artifact check completed before
either production run. Report preparation inspected the existing results and theorem statements
without rerunning the simulations or modifying the numerical implementation.
The computation follows the four-quadrant problem presented by Hakim [2]. The objective is
a comparable visualization with an explicit theorem connecting the executable file to the discrete
method. The scope is the four-variable, two-dimensional ideal-gas Euler system with γ = 7/5. A
grid outside the proved range, a different equation of state, or an obstacle geometry requires a
separate extension.

1

2

Problem and numerical representation

2.1

Euler state and initial data

Let U = (ρ, mx , my , E)T , with mx = ρu and my = ρv. The physical pressure and Cartesian fluxes
are
m2x + m2y
2
p(U ) =
E−
5
2ρ

!

,

(1)
!T

Fx (U ) =

mx my mx
m2
,
(E + p)
mx , x + p,
ρ
ρ
ρ

Fy (U ) =

mx my m2y
my
my ,
,
+ p,
(E + p)
ρ
ρ
ρ

,

(2)

.

(3)

!T

The PDE is ∂t U + ∂x Fx (U ) + ∂y Fy (U ) = 0. A real state is admissible when ρ > 0 and p(U ) > 0.
The domain is [0, 1]2 , the target time is 0.8, and the initial interfaces are x = y = 4/5. Table 1
gives the primitive states. Conversion to conserved variables uses


T
p
ρ
+ (u2 + v 2 ) .
γ−1 2



U (p, ρ, u, v) = ρ, ρu, ρv,

(4)

Every listed state has positive pressure and density. In particular, the velocity 1.206 violates no
physical admissibility condition. A sufficient implementation guard that restricts momentum relative
to density can exclude an admissible state. The solver’s checked admissibility test supports these
initial states and their required mixtures [3].
Quadrant
Top left
Top right
Bottom left
Bottom right

p

ρ

u

v

0.3
1.5
0.029
0.3

0.5323
1.5
0.138
0.5323

1.206
0
1.206
0

0
0
1.206
1.206

Table 1: Initial primitive states. The interfaces lie at x = y = 0.8.
For an n × n grid, h = 1/n and the cell centers are ((i + 1/2)h, (j + 1/2)h). Initialization
evaluates conservative area mixtures for cells cut by an interface. For example, the fraction of cell
i to the left of 4/5 is min(1, max(0, 4n/5 − i)). Products of the horizontal and vertical fractions
determine the four quadrant weights. The implementation evaluates the corresponding binary64
construction. The initial-state proof establishes safety for every possible mixture used by the grid,
including the cut cells on the 192 grid. At n = 800, both interfaces align with cell boundaries.

2.2

Words, real values, and time

The executable represents each numerical scalar by a UInt64 binary64 word. For a finite word b,
write ⟨b⟩ for its exact real value. The notation fl denotes the associated formal binary64 operation
with its specified rounding, and does not imply native Lean floating-point evaluation. The plotted
pressure is the rounded thermodynamic output computed from the conserved state. Equation (1)
defines the corresponding physical real pressure. The physical reference uses the exact constants
2

2/5 and 7/5. The executable’s nearest binary64 constants and all arithmetic intermediates enter
the rounding analysis.
The final-time word is
⟨T ⟩ =

T = 0x3fe999999999999a,

3602879701896397
.
4503599627370496

(5)

The figures label this time as 0.8. The control theorem establishes equality of the returned word
with T . Each accepted advance uses rounded addition, so this claim does not assert that the exact
real sum of accepted timestep values equals 4/5. The conservation theorem uses the individual
decoded timestep values and the numerical trace.

3

Reconstruction, fluxes, and time control

3.1

Five-cell directional update

Each sweep reads a five-cell stencil, reconstructs the left, center, and right cells, and obtains the
four states needed at the center cell’s two interfaces. For a scalar component, the ideal slope is
(

di = minmod(Ui − Ui−1 , Ui+1 − Ui ),

minmod(a, b) =

sgn(a) min(|a|, |b|), ab > 0,
0,
ab ≤ 0.

(6)

The implementation forms rounded backward and forward differences and applies minmod componentwise. A shared factor f scales all four slope components. It forms Ui− = fl(Ui − fl(f di )) and
Ui+ = fl(Ui + fl(f di )), then checks both faces. Eight attempts test f = 1/2, 1/4, . . . , 1/256. If every
candidate fails, the limiter returns the center state at both faces with f = 0. Invalid input states or
nonfinite slope differences produce a checked rejection [4].
For a normal direction ν, let Fν = νx Fx + νy Fy . The real reference flux at an interface is
Gν (L, R; a) =

Fν (L) + Fν (R) a
− (R − L),
2
2

(7)

where the executable selects an outward upper bound a for the characteristic speeds of both
reconstructed states. The directional update has the finite-volume form
Uinew = Ui − r Gi+1/2 − Gi−1/2 ,


(8)

with the executable’s operation order and rounding. The decoded ratio r bounds n⟨∆t⟩ from above.
The proof retains the difference between r and n⟨∆t⟩ as a residual.
An x sweep precedes a y sweep with the same accepted timestep. The y sweep reads the
intermediate grid produced by the x sweep. Neighbor indices clamp at the domain edge, implementing
a constant extension of the boundary cells. The method has no half-time predictor or second-order
time integrator. The local reconstruction results therefore do not establish second-order accuracy of
the complete time-dependent scheme.

3.2

Positivity limiter and local accuracy

Positive cell averages can produce a negative-pressure reconstructed face. A checked example uses
L = (1, 0, 0, 1/8),

C = (1, 1, 0, 5/8),

3

R = (1, 2, 0, 17/8).

(9)

All three states have internal energy 1/8. Unlimited minmod reconstruction at C gives the right
face (1, 3/2, 0, 7/8), whose internal energy is −1/4 and pressure is −1/10. The real counterexample
and the executable limiter behavior are checked separately. The executable rejects f = 1/2 and
f = 1/4, then accepts f = 1/8 [5].
Accepted reconstruction yields two safe faces, a finite factor in [0, 1/2], and a local accuracy
certificate. Let Dk be the real minmod slope computed from the decoded inputs, dk the rounded
slope word, and Rkslope its proved error bound. Write R(b) for the library’s rounding-radius bound
at word b. For each conserved component k, the certificate includes
⟨Uk± ⟩ − ⟨Uk ⟩ ± ⟨f ⟩Dk



≤ R(fl(f dk )) + R(Uk± ) + |⟨f ⟩|Rkslope ,

R(Uk− ) + R(Uk+ )
⟨Uk− ⟩ + ⟨Uk+ ⟩
− ⟨Uk ⟩ ≤
.
2
2

(10)
(11)

The constant fallback satisfies exact equality with the center state. The companion real minmod
results establish preservation of constants, linear data, and reflection. Exact linear reconstruction
in the binary64 implementation requires the stated representability and acceptance premises.
Equations (10)–(11) describe local rounding error, independently of spatial truncation error [6].

3.3

Outward speed bounds and accepted timesteps

Nearest-rounded evaluation of a characteristic
p speed can underestimate its physical real value. For
U = (1, 0, 0, 1), the physical sound speed is 14/25. The previous nearest-rounded helper accepts
this input and returns 0x3fe7f254dab9cc3a, whose decoded value is strictly smaller. The repository
proves both the strict inequality and execution of the corresponding helper in the previous exact
binary. Reachability of this state from the production initial data is unproved [7].
The reconstructed solver uses checked outward arithmetic for the speed and mesh bounds.
Successful checks establish
s

a ≥ |uν | +

7p
,
5ρ

r ≥ n⟨∆t⟩,

1
ra ≤ ,
2

(12)

at the required accepted interfaces. Here uν = (νx mx + νy my )/ρ, and a, r denote decoded executable
values. The outward construction accounts for rounding in thermodynamics, square root, the
maximum over states, and grid spacing. Its validity follows from status-zero checks, without a
caller-supplied bound on an unknown arithmetic error [8].
Time control first scans the current grid for a speed bound. It proposes the minimum of a
nearest-rounded 0.4h/a and the rounded remaining time. It then checks positive progress, the
outward ratio and CFL conditions, and both sweeps. A failed CFL or sweep check halves the
timestep and retries. A successful step commits the new grid. A failure returns the last accepted
grid and its time [9].
The controller has explicit finite fuel for reconstruction attempts, timestep retries, and advances.
It sizes advance fuel from the final-time word and retry fuel from the proposed timestep word, using
their unsigned integer values. The proof uses these bounds for termination. They are deliberately
loose bounds on execution length, and do not estimate elapsed runtime. Status zero means that
the time word equals T . The remaining controller statuses distinguish invalid grid size (1), a failed
speed scan (2), invalid time progress (3), exhausted retry fuel (4), and exhausted advance fuel before
T (5). The complete theorem covers the supported grid range and every UInt64 reconstruction
budget, including failure returns.
4

4

Mathematical guarantees on the accepted trace

4.1

Physical flux derivative and hyperbolicity
p

For an admissible state, put u = mx /ρ, v = my /ρ, H = (E + p)/ρ, and c = 7p/(5ρ). The proof
first establishes that the specified matrix Ax is the Fréchet derivative of Fx . It then verifies




1
1
 u−c
u

R=
 v
v
H − uc (u2 + v 2 )/2

Ax R = R diag(u − c, u, u, u + c),

0
1
0 u+c 

.
1
v 
v H + uc

(13)

The acoustic identity c2 = (2/5)(H − (u2 + v 2 )/2) gives det R = 5c3 ̸= 0. Thus Ax has a complete
eigenbasis, including two independent eigenvectors for the repeated advective eigenvalue [10].
An orthogonal rotation establishes the derivative and eigenbasis in every unit direction ν. The
eigenvalues are uν − c, uν , uν , uν + c. Defining Lν = Rν−1 yields Lν Rν = Rν Lν = I, the left
eigenrelation, and Rν (Lν ∆U ) = ∆U . The sharp spectral magnitude is |uν | + c. The positivity
guard’s soundness connects accepted finite words to admissible real states, so these results apply to
the terminal cells, intermediate accepted grids, and reconstructed faces used in an accepted sweep.
The accepted-trace specification also carries the physical characteristic Courant inequalities.
On the input grid it covers each characteristic in both Cartesian orientations. On each sweep it
covers the four reconstructed interface states and the resulting grid. Equation (12) then gives
⟨∆t⟩ n |λk | ≤ 1/2 for those interface states. These are proved local inequalities on an accepted
discrete trace. A global PDE stability or entropy theorem requires additional arguments.

4.2

Wave and interface identities

Let ∆U = R − L and ∆F = Fν (R) − Fν (L). For a ̸= 0, define the two Lax–Friedrichs waves
W− =

∆F
1
∆U −
2
a




W+ =

,

1
∆F
∆U +
2
a




.

(14)

The shared real algebra proves
W − + W + = ∆U,

−aW − + aW + = ∆F.

(15)

The interface flux satisfies Gν (U, U ; a) = Fν (U ), its left and right fluctuation formulas, and the
orientation identity G−ν (R, L; a) = −Gν (L, R; a). These identities describe the real Rusanov
reference. Separate residual bounds connect the executable interface arithmetic to it [11].

4.3

Conservation and physical rounding residuals

Adjacent cell updates use the same ordered reconstructed face pair. The exact computation of their
shared interface flux is therefore identical even when the two cells recompute it. Summing their
update equations cancels interior interface terms. The proof establishes cancellation for each row,
each directional sweep, and the complete accepted trace [12].
For component k, define the area-weighted total
Mk (U ) =

1 X
⟨Uij,k ⟩.
n2 i,j

5

(16)

Let U 0 , . . . , U N be the accepted grids, and ∆tℓ their timestep words. Let Bℓ,k be the net boundary
sum of the exact-real Rusanov reference fluxes, with inward sign, using the decoded reconstructed
faces and selected speed. It includes the x boundary terms on U ℓ and the y boundary terms on
that step’s intermediate grid. The final physical balance has the form
N
−1
X
⟨∆tℓ ⟩
Mk (U ) − Mk (U ) =
Bℓ,k +
Rℓ,k ,
n
ℓ=0
ℓ=0
N

0

N
−1
X

Rℓ,k ≤

ℓ=0

N
−1
X

N
−1
X

Eℓ,k .

(17)
(18)

ℓ=0

Each Eℓ,k is an explicit expression in the proved local update, flux, and ratio error bounds. If rℓ is
the decoded executable ratio, Bbℓ,k the computed boundary flux sum, and eupd
ℓ,k the summed update
residual, then
b
eupd
ℓ,k + rℓ Bℓ,k − n⟨∆tℓ ⟩Bℓ,k
Rℓ,k =
.
(19)
n2
upd
flux , and ratio bound E ratio , the formal majorant is
For update bound Eℓ,k
, boundary-flux bound Eℓ,k
ℓ

Eℓ,k =

upd
flux + E ratio |B |
Eℓ,k
+ |rℓ |Eℓ,k
ℓ,k
ℓ

n2

.

(20)

It accounts for floating-point updates, physical side fluxes, Rusanov arithmetic, mesh spacing, and
the ratio. The physical flux reference uses the decoded face states, so its definition does not absorb
spatial reconstruction error into a roundoff claim.
The balance holds for all four conserved components of the internal grid, including runs that
return after a failed trial. Rejected trials contribute no accepted step. The production output
retains density and pressure, and does not export momenta, energy, or the complete timestep trace.
Consequently the report presents the symbolic proved bounds, without claiming a numerically
evaluated global conservation-error budget from the saved two-field files.

5

Exact-binary execution theorem

5.1

Statement and input domain

Let B be the frozen 30,726-byte artifact, decode(B) = ok(rB ), and validate(rB ) = ok(vB ). The
package proves both equalities, core validity of rB , and equality of the translated validated module
with the module used in the execution proofs. Let M = vB .toTalos, S0 = M.initialStore, and
C(n, q) = Control.solve n q.
Theorem 5.1 (Complete artifact behavior). For every host environment, n ∈ N with 2 ≤ n ≤ 800,
and reconstruction budget q represented by a UInt64, function 148 of M terminates from S0 . It
returns one pointer to an owned array whose words equal C(n, q). Its final linear memory has
at most 8192 pages of 65,536 bytes, or 512 MiB. The returned grid is safe. If its status word
is zero, its time word is T and its grid is the endpoint of the specified accepted numerical trace
from initialization. That trace has the hyperbolicity, reconstruction, Courant, and physical balance
properties stated above.
The four exported artifact theorems establish these claims in increasing scope: exact execution,
safety and successful completion, hyperbolicity and trace facts, and conservation [13, 14]. The proof
6

interface places the arguments on the formal operand stack as [i64 q, i64 n]. The host’s ordinary
call order is solve(n,q). The postcondition identifies the heap object and every output word. It
does not assume successful completion for every supported input.
The theorem quantifies over the reconstruction budget, but the grid bound is explicit in both the
source and specification. The current executable rejects n > 800. A 1600 × 1600 calculation therefore
requires changes to the grid domain, allocation bounds, generated binary, and corresponding proofs.
It cannot instantiate Theorem 5.1 unchanged.

5.2

Execution, termination, and allocation

The execution proof composes exact scalar-operation theorems with memory reads and writes, array
traversal, allocation, release, and loop invariants. The source recurrence provides the exact output
specification. Compiler-produced function and instruction regions identify reusable portions of the
preceding solver, and checked equalities justify transfer to the new function indices. The remaining
reconstructed sweep and control regions receive their own execution proofs [15].
The memory argument tracks owned buffers, reusable free nodes, the heap top, and available
pages. The proved allocation budget is at most 350,243,520 bytes beyond the initial heap base of
4096 bytes. The initial memory has 16 pages. Specializing the allocation lemmas to an 8192-page
bound proves the final-memory postcondition, including retries and released trial grids. The formal
execution follows the module’s memory-growth rules. The reported bound concerns WebAssembly
linear memory, and does not bound Wasmtime’s JIT code, native stack, runtime metadata, or
operating-system memory.
The host initializes the runtime by calling exported reset function 150 before the single solve call.
A separate exact-byte theorem proves that this reset preserves the module’s initial store and returns
no values. Its six global writes reproduce the initializers, and it performs no memory operation [16].
Thus the observed startup sequence meets the solve theorem’s initial-store premise under the formal
semantics.

5.3

Binary decoding and proof reuse

The decoder proof works from the embedded byte array, validates the decoded module, and proves
translation equality for all 153 functions. The function count includes 149 source functions and four
runtime functions. The proof about these bytes needs no general compiler-correctness assumption:
compilation produces the candidate artifact, and the subsequent artifact proof checks its behavior.
A digest identifies the external file. The mathematical theorem uses the embedded bytes, and the
independent package checker compares them with the file to execute [14].
Proof construction used compiler annotations together with the repository’s LTG retrieval system
for checked lemmas, tactics, and guidance [17]. The journal records consultation of direct-call,
array-fold, generated-frame, and allocation material. Checked region transfer reused retained solver
functions. The shared allocation theorem covered both free-list reuse and growth, while narrower
retrieved allocation examples did not fit the sweep’s premises. Compiler inspection also exposed
missing return and unsigned-shift cases in the shared instruction-renaming support, which the
development added and checked [18].
Large combined decoder and metadata evaluations reached their three-minute resource limits.
Dividing the work into bounded entry and section proofs, then applying shared vector and parsercomposition lemmas, completed the exact-file check without changing the artifact. These are
recorded proof-engineering results for this binary. The development did not establish a held-out

7

performance improvement for the decoding method or a general LTG speedup. The retained journal
distinguishes retrieval attempts, failed checks, and accepted proof compositions.
The independent package check accepted all nine manifest declarations and their axiom audits. The behavioral theorems depend only on the accepted standard logical axioms propext,
Classical.choice, and Quot.sound, or subsets of them. The completed proof adds no admitted
theorem, new axiom, or unchecked native decision. The proof workspace pins Lean 4.34.0-rc2 and
the Talos revision recorded in Appendix B.

5.4

Trusted components

The formal result assumes the Lean kernel and the mathematical definitions of binary64 operations
and WebAssembly execution used by the proof. A mistake in the intended specification or in its
relation to the physical modeling goal remains possible despite successful type checking. The report
exposes the equations, domain restrictions, status conditions, and residual definitions so those
choices can be reviewed.
Wasmtime’s implementation, the operating system, hardware, artifact loading, host output
serialization, CSV conversion, and plotting are outside the Lean theorem. The driver checks the
artifact digest and validates output length, status, time, dimensions, finiteness, and positivity.
Those checks supply execution evidence. They do not formally verify the execution engine or the
image-generation software. Likewise, the pure source recurrence is mathematically specified in Lean,
but evaluating it through Lean’s native compiler would require confidence in that execution path.
The artifact proof supplies a precise executable target and its formal semantics for the calculation
reported here.

6

Production runs and visualization

Both runs used one local Wasmtime process and one solve call, with eight reconstruction attempts.
The numerical loop, boundary reads, accepted-step control, and allocation execute within the
WASM module. The host receives the final array after the solve completes. The standard runner
limited the process to one CPU, a 4 GiB memory-high threshold, a 6 GiB memory maximum, and 1
GiB of swap. The 800-grid monitoring samples were near 309 MiB. That observation is a sampled
process-resource measurement, distinct from the formal linear-memory bound.
Table 2 records the measured endpoints [19]. Elapsed time starts immediately before the runner
invocation and ends after the host exits. It includes runner startup and serialization of the returned
words to stdout, and excludes subsequent CSV conversion and plotting. The files contain neither
accepted-step counts nor limiter-retry counts, so these measurements do not separate reconstruction
cost from timestep changes.
Figures 1 and 2 show similar large-scale front positions and a high-density region near (0.6, 0.6).
The 800-grid result resolves more internal structure. These visual features resemble the density
figure in the Lanyon article [2]. The comparison is qualitative: neither an exact two-dimensional
solution nor a reference-field error norm accompanies these images.
The repository also preserves the preceding first-order 800-grid run [20]. Its density maximum
was 1.6711 and its pressure maximum was 1.6321, compared with 1.7392 and 1.6635 here. The
revised method changes both reconstruction and speed arithmetic, so the difference cannot isolate
either change. Two grid resolutions and these extrema establish neither an empirical convergence
rate nor a continuum error estimate.
The plotting script reads the saved cell CSV and uses nearest-cell color rendering on the unit
square, with density in viridis, pressure in magma, and 16 white contour levels strictly between
8

Quantity

192 × 192

800 × 800

0
176.7 s
0.138
1.72510
0.02900
1.67059

0
14,277.8 s
0.138
1.73921
0.02900
1.66352

Status
Elapsed time
Minimum density
Maximum density
Minimum pressure
Maximum pressure

Table 2: Production results from the same proved artifact. Both final-time words equal T . Extrema
are rounded for display. The raw words retain the exact binary64 values.

Figure 1: Density and pressure on the 192 × 192 grid at the binary64 time labeled 0.8. Color shows
cell values. White lines are interpolated contours. Each field uses its own linear color range.

9

Figure 2: Density and pressure on the 800 × 800 grid from the completed single-process WASM run.
The original production PNG is included without numerical resampling or image editing. The finer
grid shows thinner fronts and more curved internal layers.
each field’s extrema. Contours interpolate between cell centers. Each panel has its own scale,
including across resolutions. The retained PNG, SVG, and PDF figures allow inspection of the
same data in three formats. The report embeds the required 800-grid PNG directly.

7

Comparison with the published Lanyon treatment

Hakim’s article supplies the problem and presents Lax-flux simulations alongside claims about
hyperbolicity and wave identities [2]. Its linked two-dimensional proof file defines real-valued states
and expressions [21]. At the cited revision, xHyperbolicity and yHyperbolicity assert that
each already real-typed eigenvalue expression equals some real number. Their witnesses are the
expressions themselves. Those statements do not establish a flux derivative or an eigenbasis. The
present derivative, eigenrelation, and nonzero-determinant proofs establish those mathematical
obligations.
The published minmod expressions reconstruct each conserved component with factor 1/2,
without a face-admissibility test in those definitions. Their real consistency, linearity, and reflection
statements provide a comparison of local algebraic properties. Our implementation adds checked
binary64 reconstruction, common-factor positivity limiting, and outward speed bounds, then
composes their properties through the complete accepted grid trace. The exact-artifact theorem
connects that trace to the file executed for the figures. This comparison concerns the cited
public declarations and this specific ideal-gas problem. It does not assess uninspected Lanyon
implementations or establish parity for general equations of state, three-dimensional flow, or cylinder
boundaries.

10

8

Remaining mathematical obligations

Convergence to a continuous entropy solution remains open. A result of that form would require
a family of discretizations as h, ∆t → 0, a stated mode of convergence, compactness or stability
estimates sufficient for that limit, consistency in the weak formulation, treatment of the boundary
conditions, and an entropy admissibility argument. The current finite input range and fixed
binary64 arithmetic also require explicit treatment: a limiting theorem cannot follow by increasing
n indefinitely in this unchanged binary. The proved local Courant bounds, admissibility, and
residual identities are inputs to such an analysis, but supply neither its compactness nor its entropy
conclusion.
Universal status-zero completion for every supported grid and reconstruction budget remains
unproved. Complete behavior and termination hold even when a checked computation fails. Both
production runs demonstrated the successful branch, which activates the proved terminal-time
statement. A universal success proof would need bounds ensuring that the evolving states, arithmetic
guards, timestep progress, and retry process remain acceptable through the target time.
The final data contain enough information to reproduce the reported density and pressure
figures. Quantitative audits of total momentum, energy, accumulated physical rounding error, or
accepted-step statistics require additional output or a separately justified trace reconstruction. Any
such executable change would create a new artifact requiring its own exact-byte proof.

A

Theorem and source index

Table 3 gives the primary declarations behind the report. Paths are relative to proofs/talos/lea
n/Project/ at the fixed checkpoint. The prefix ER in the table abbreviates the namespace Proj
ect.EulerReconstructed, and RF abbreviates Project.Euler2DConservative.RealFlux. Links
resolve to the complete source definitions and premises.
Table 3: Claim-to-declaration index.
Claim

Declaration and source

Complete execution

ER.Spec.solve_exact, ER.Execution.solve_initial_exact.
Specification and initial-store execution.
ER.Spec.solve_success, ER.Spec.source_success. Status-zero
specification.
ER.Spec.solve_hyperbolic, ER.Numerics.initial_trace_facts.
Trace safety and stencil facts.
ER.Spec.solve_balance,
ER.Conservation.physical_run_balance. Physical trace balance.
ER.Artifact.artifact_solve_exact, artifact_solve_success,
artifact_solve_hyperbolic, artifact_solve_balance in that
namespace. Artifact translation.
ER.HostInitial.artifact_reset_initial. Startup-state proof.

Successful endpoint
Accepted trace facts
Physical balance
Exact bytes

Host reset
Flux derivative
Complete eigenbasis

Reconstruction error

RF.hasFDerivAt_xFlux, RF.hasFDerivAt_directionalFlux.
Cartesian derivative and directional derivative.
RF.directional_hyperbolicity,
RF.directional_eigenvector_inverses,
RF.directional_characteristic_reconstruction. Inverse and
decomposition.
Project.EulerReconstruction.Spec.reconstruct_accuracy and
reconstruct_factor. Reconstruction specification.

11

B

Claim

Declaration and source

Wave identities

directional_wave_identities in Project.EulerRiemann.RealRus
anov. Wave and interface algebra.

Artifact identities and reproduction

The evidence checkpoint is
73e5b54ee6ba398cdd4d42feadc42e2c6ec5a33a.
The reconstructed solver’s SHA-256 is
b955d70e023fe830b0a284a3b634923746872e0747b381d697f5b293680362fb.
The binary and manifest reside under proofs/artifacts/euler_reconstructed/, in the directory
named by that digest. The manifest identifies the byte definition, decoded cache, generated execution
model, behavioral specification, and validation profile leanexe-core-v1. Its formal host-assumption
list is empty. The external runtime assumptions remain those in Section 5.4.
The Lean toolchain is 4.34.0-rc2, commit
6a10ac8c22beadecabdbb0919c2b50214762f91d.
The Talos revision is
87e3aa5e8f6e6f3b3eb5e7e4c5aba43071002d47.
The runtime and data tools are Wasmtime 44.0.0, Node.js 24.13.0, wasm-tools 1.251.0, and
Matplotlib 3.10.8. The repository documents the pinned environment and runner [1].
Each dataset resides under data/euler-reconstructed-v1/, in 192-run or 800-run. It contains retained stdout and stderr, words.u64le, cells.csv.gz, summary.json, and density-pressure
PNG, SVG, and PDF files. The binary word sequence has length 4 + 2n2 : status, time bits, nx , ny ,
n2 density words, and n2 pressure words, all little-endian. Cells use row-major order with x varying
fastest. The CSV columns are i,j,x,y,density,pressure.
The output-word SHA-256 values are
192 : 6304853f58507013eca1eef730c0081de271233694f5b122d03539175ccb6b3c,
800 : 64ff9d32fe0f7db442211b1c160726962d7742e92a3e7336d96199232a87dd4c.
The production driver verifies the solver digest before execution and preserves the raw output before
checking success. To reproduce the numerical runs from the repository root, select new output
directories:
node tools/euler-riemann-complete.js \
run-reconstructed 192 8 new-192-directory
node tools/euler-riemann-complete.js \
run-reconstructed 800 8 new-800-directory
The driver invokes the resource runner for the numerical process. Plot each completed directory
with the installed figure environment:

12

tools/leanrun --timeout 2m \
build/tools/riemann-figures-venv/bin/python \
tools/euler-riemann-plot.py new-800-directory
The same plotting command accepts new-192-directory. The accepted independent proof
check uses tools/artifact-proof.js check, the frozen program.wasm path, and the target
Project.EulerReconstructed.ArtifactTranslation. It invokes Lean through the serialized
resource runner. The detailed development journal retains the check outcomes and the separate
startup-reset proof result [18].

References
[1] LeanExe contributors. LeanExe: completed reconstructed Euler proof and data. Repository
checkpoint 73e5b54e, 15 September 2026. Repository and toolchain documentation.
[2] Ammar Hakim. The Euler Equations of Gas Dynamics. Lanyon.AI, July 2026. https://lany
on.ai/research/euler-equations/.
[3] LeanExe contributors. Initial-state geometry, mixtures, and admissibility. Initial-state proof,
binary64 construction, and cell geometry.
[4] LeanExe contributors. Checked minmod reconstruction. Executable model and safety proof.
[5] LeanExe contributors. Reconstruction positivity counterexample. Real counterexample and
binary64 limiter behavior.
[6] LeanExe contributors. Reconstruction accuracy and factor bounds. Specification, accuracy, and
conditional linear exactness.
[7] LeanExe contributors. Accepted speed underestimate. Strict physical inequality and exact-artifact
execution.
[8] LeanExe contributors. Outward speed and Courant bounds. Speed specification, grid characteristic bound, and mesh ratio.
[9] LeanExe contributors. Reconstructed solver control. Recurrence, accepted trace, and time
operations.
[10] LeanExe contributors. Euler flux derivative and complete eigenbasis. Derivative, eigenrelation
and determinant, directional hyperbolicity, and inverse basis.
[11] LeanExe contributors. Real Rusanov wave and flux identities. Euler specialization and shared
algebra.
[12] LeanExe contributors. Reconstructed physical conservation. Computed trace, physical step,
physical run, and ratio residual.
[13] LeanExe contributors. Complete reconstructed solver specifications. Exact, safe, hyperbolic, and
balance specifications.
[14] LeanExe contributors. Reconstructed Euler artifact proof. Exact-byte behavior and package
format and independent checking.
13

[15] LeanExe contributors. Complete reconstructed execution and allocation. Solve composition and
budget and initial-store specialization.
[16] LeanExe contributors. Exact-artifact startup reset. Reset preservation theorem.
[17] LeanExe contributors. Knowledge Forest and Structured LTG. Retrieval and checked proof
assets and compiler annotations.
[18] LeanExe contributors. Development journal. Entries of 14–15 September 2026 at the evidence
checkpoint. Commands, failed checks, accepted proofs, and production records.
[19] LeanExe contributors. Reconstructed Euler data. Article and datasets, execution and decoding
driver, and figure renderer.
[20] LeanExe contributors. Complete first-order Euler calculation. Preserved proof, data, and figures.
[21] Lanyon.AI. CompressibleEuler: two-dimensional proof source. Revision a736aa5f8b17efd22
5c4692404e2442361d06729. Real state, hyperbolicity, wave, and reconstruction declarations.
Inspected 15 September 2026.

14

